<p style='font-size: 32px;'>
Learning tool for ‘<b>D</b>ansk <b>F</b>lora og
<b>V</b>egetationsøkologi’ (<b>DFV</b>)
<p>
<center>
<h2>
Table of Contents
</h2>
</center>

-   <a href="#1-setup" id="toc-1-setup">1 Setup</a>
-   <a href="#2-detailed-information-and-documentation"
    id="toc-2-detailed-information-and-documentation">2 Detailed Information
    and Documentation</a>
    -   <a href="#21-layout" id="toc-21-layout">2.1 Layout</a>
        -   <a href="#211-learning-tool-menu" id="toc-211-learning-tool-menu">2.1.1
            Learning Tool Menu</a>
        -   <a href="#212-user-interface" id="toc-212-user-interface">2.1.2 User
            Interface</a>
        -   <a href="#213-observation-window" id="toc-213-observation-window">2.1.3
            Observation Window</a>
    -   <a href="#22-learning-tool-species-identification"
        id="toc-22-learning-tool-species-identification">2.2 Learning tool:
        Species identification</a>
    -   <a href="#23-learning-tool-habitat-knowledge"
        id="toc-23-learning-tool-habitat-knowledge">2.3 Learning Tool: Habitat
        Knowledge</a>
-   <a href="#3-notes" id="toc-3-notes">3 Notes</a>

<center>

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/asgersvenning/Dansk-Flora-App/GitHub/readme_files/learnDFV_Sticker.png" width="250px">

</center>

<br>

<center>

<div style="font-size: 30px; font-weight: bold;">

Demo:
[shinyapps.io](https://asvenning.shinyapps.io/lringsredskab_-_dansk_flora_og_vegetationskologi/?_ga=2.117524928.852255328.1662635286-946788904.1657455478)

</div>

</center>

# 1 Setup

**Important:** It is important to update R and RTools to the newest
version (both can be found on [the offical website of
R](https://www.r-project.org/)) and RStudio as the app has not been
created with compatibility in mind. The app has been verified to work on
*“R version 4.1.3 (2022-03-10)”*.

1)  Make sure to install and update the following packages to ensure
    that the app works; **shiny**, **shinyjs**, **tidyverse**,
    **rjson**, **rrapply**, **magrittr**, **keys**, **extrafont**,
    **googlesheets4**, **kableExtra**, **furrr**, **ggpubr** and
    **hash**. If you are unsure if you have all these packages installed
    copy and run the following code (:

<!-- -->

    # Vector of the names of necessary packages for the app to run
    necessaryPackages <- c("shiny", "shinyjs", "keys",          # Packages for shiny app functionality
                           "tidyverse", "furrr",                # ------|------data wrangling and more 
                           "rrapply", "magrittr",               # ------|------data wrangling
                           "googlesheets4", "rjson",            # ------|------data import
                           "hash",                              # ------|------efficient dictionaries
                           "extrafont", "ggpubr", "kableExtra") # ------|------plots and tables

    # Loops over all the packages, try to load package, on error install package instead.
    sapply(necessaryPackages, function(x) {
      tryCatch({
        library(x, character.only = T)
      },
      error = function(y) install.packages(x))
    })

2)  Open and run the R script file *“runApp.R”*.

3)  A few important notes on the app in it’s current state:

    -   In order to view the first observation or habitat, the user must
        wait until the loading wheel turns into a green checkmark and
        only at this point press the button “Tryk for (ny) art” or “Tryk
        for (ny) habitat”.
    -   The app may be a bit slow, especially when used on
        [shinyapps.io](https://asvenning.shinyapps.io/lringsredskab_-_dansk_flora_og_vegetationskologi/?_ga=2.117524928.852255328.1662635286-946788904.1657455478)
        since *shinyapps.io* is a free service, but the app should
        execute the user input once it catches up.
    -   The app was not designed initially to be used on a server.
    -   If the app freezes (which is quite possible) the user should
        refresh the page or restart the app, depending on how the user
        is using the app (*shinyapps.io* vs. locally).

# 2 Detailed Information and Documentation

A short description of the use and functionality of the app.

## 2.1 Layout

![](readme_files/appLayout.jpg)

### 2.1.1 Learning Tool Menu

A menu where the user can switch between the different tools that are a
part of the app.

### 2.1.2 User Interface

This is where almost all of the interactive user inputs live; buttons
for requesting a new observation or habitat, changing the current
observation photo, revealing the species or habitat etc. Some of the
information regarding the species that will be shown after the species
is revealed can also be found here.

### 2.1.3 Observation Window

This is where the app displays the information (photo or species list)
which the user can use to guess either which species is in an
observation or which habitat a species list is from. The user can also
click on an image of a species and be redirected to the INaturalist
observation from which the image is taken. This could be used by the
user to make a new identification of the observation species, if the
user believes the observation ID is wrong.

## 2.2 Learning tool: Species identification

By using the user interface observation photos can be requested using
the button “Tryk for (ny) art!”, which will result in a photo of a plant
being displayed in the observation window. If the observation which the
photo originates from contains more than one photo, the button “Skift
billede” will be tinted yellow. The button can then be used to switch
between the images in the observation. When the user has made their
guess (which they must hold themselves accountable for in the current
state of the app), the “true” species can be revealed using the button
“Afslør arten!” which will also result in the following information
being shown:

1)  Danish and scientific name
    1.  familie, orden og klasse (only scientific)
2)  List of NOVANA-habitats where the species is found (colored
    according to frequency)
3)  Common mix-ups
4)  Ellenberg-values
5)  The photo in the observation window is replaced by an iframe of the
    wikipedia entry. (**The user can switch back to the observation
    photos by pressing the “Skift billede” button if they want to
    dispute the species ID.**)

To view the next observation press the “Tryk for (ny) art!” button
again!.

If the user wishes to practice on a subset of species, they can use the
filter functionality at the top of the user interface (above the “Tryk
for (ny) art!” button). In order to use this functionality the user must
first choose a taxonomic level to filter on, then input a string in the
field below and press the putton “Filtrer”. This string can include
multiple queries by delimiting the queries using a comma (example:
level=“taxon_genus_name” query=“silene,cirsium,viola”). The subsetting
will only occur once the next api batch query occurs (that means after a
maximum of 10 observations).

There is also the possibility of using the keyboard keys 1-4 after
revealing a species, to tell the app how “hard” the species was (to ID):

**1** : Easy *(0.5)*

**2** : Comfortable *(1)*

**3** : Unsure *(2)*

**4** : Difficult *(4)*

The numbers in the italic parenthesis, difficulty multiplier, are used
as sampling weights and will update the currently shown species sampling
weight by multiplying the difficulity multiplier. This way a user can
quickly ensure that they are shown more and more “hard” species and less
and less “easy” species.

## 2.3 Learning Tool: Habitat Knowledge

The main functionality of this tool is to allow the user to sample the
species pool of a real NOVANA plot, which they can then try to guess.
The tool also calculates mean Ellenberg scores (for the species with
available data) as well as shows the vernacular (if available) and
scientific name. The user can request a new plot using the button “Tryk
for (nyt) habitat!”, which will reveal the aforementioned species list
and Ellenberg scores.

After the user has guessed on the habitat type of the plot in question,
the answer can be revealed by the user pressing the button “Afslør
habtiatet!”, which will reveal the following information:

1)  The habitat name. The first name is a “translated” name in
    accordance with the curriculum of last year, while the second name
    in parentheses is the official NOVANA habitat name.

2)  A species frequency histogram of the up to 25 most common species in
    the habitat (not just the current plot, which only contains
    presence/absence data from my data source).

I have attempted to translate the scientific Latin names using
Wikipedia, but this only works in case there is a Wikipedia entry of the
species under the scientific name used in NOVANA. This has caused the
translation to become a little unstable especially for “uncharismatic”,
cryptic or rare species, but it works quite well for vascular plants.

**PSA:** This tool can be more unstable than the first.

# 3 Notes

A major drawback of this learning application in it’s current state, is
the imbalance between charismatic and uncharismatic species in the
“Species Identification” learning tool, which in essence could reenforce
this bias in the learner. This bias also extends to the translation of
names, extra information on the species etc. This tool also currently
only contains species from the previous year’s curriculum, which might
be undesirable.

For the other learning tool “Habitat Knowledge”, there is also bias in
the number of plots in each habitat type, however I think it is a
reasonable assumption that this bias reflects the actual frequency of
habitats, at least to a large degree. However an issue with this tool
that I and others have noticed, is that the translation from NOVANA
habitats to curriculum habitats (which was done using a manual
dictionary created by me), was less than ideal. Also some habitats are
basically impossible to distinguish, at least when the species lists are
short (which differs between plots.
